---
layout: post
title:  "12 Factor apps"
date:   2017-11-12 19:45:31 -0300
categories: [article]
tags: [architecture]
author: Marcelo Foss
---
The guys at Heroku released by the end of 2011, a now open-source manifesto that enumerates 12 factors (or best practices, or rules) to develop SaaS (software-as-a-service) products.

The main goals of those 12 factors are:
* minimize effort to board new developers
* maximize portability
* encourage continuous deployment
* scale effortless

If you are developing a SaaS product this document will show you lots of ways to improve your development practices.  
It is not directly coupled to any specific language or development environment.

These factors tend to drive highly cohesive applications and services that also exhibit low coupling with their dependencies.

Each application or service should be in a single repository that can be built and deployed on its own.  
Rather than branching or forking to create multiple deployable versions of the application, we should externalize configuration so that the maintenance costs are not exponentially growing to support all versions of the application.  
These applications should also have understandable boundaries and implement a single concept or responsibility to increase their disposability.  
Creating stateless applications and services enables horizontal scaling and redundancy across multiple nodes in a cloud.  
Deploying multiple instances of an application or service results in multiple ports that can load balanced and registered for use by others.

[https://12factor.net/](https://12factor.net/)

## 1. Codebase
### One codebase tracked in revision control, many deploys
That's it, you should use any reliable source control system (git, mercurial, subversion, ...), and master it. Yes, believe me, I already saw software being developed without versioning, or with homemade solutions...

*"There is always a one-to-one correlation between the codebase and the app"*  
Do not use a single source control repository to all company projects. One repository to each application.

## 2. Dependencies
###  Explicitly declare and isolate dependencies
*"A twelve-factor app never relies on implicit existence of system-wide packages"*
All libraries, components, packages, all dependencies, must be explicit declared in an configurantion file. A good example is Bundler/Gem tool in Ruby.

*"Twelve-factor apps also do not rely on the implicit existence of any system tools"*
This philosophy extends to your devs or devops team managing entire machine configurations using management tools like Chef and Puppet

## 3. Config
### Store config in the environment
*strict separation of config from code*
Application configuration settings should **not** be stored inside the code. Normally they change more often then code, and also are dependent of an outside tool, like a database, an operating system, are credentials, etc.
*"The twelve-factor app stores config in environment variables"*
Somehow self explanable.

## 4. Backing services
### "Treat backing services as attached resources"
*"The code for a twelve-factor app makes no distinction between local and third party services"*
The application should be able to swap the backing service (resource), within a configuration file.
A good example is the Ruby on Rails database.yml, where you can change from a database that is installed locally in the same server as the application, to a database in the cloud, just by change its configuration file.

## 5. Build, release, run
### Strictly separate build and run stages
A deploy should be executed in three steps:
1. A **build stage**, where the application is extracted from the source code repository,
2. A **release stage**, where the outcome from the build stage is combined with configuration variables
3. A **run stage**, where all the services are running
A good example for that is Capistrano deploy tool, used in the ruby world.

## 6. Processes
### Execute the app as one or more stateless processes
*"Twelve-factor processes are stateless and share-nothing"*  
Having stateless processes makes your application scalable, or at least easier to scale. If the application keep changes in an object in the session, without persisting it in a database, it is is going to be quite difficult to apply load balance to the app.

## 7. Port binding
### Export services via port binding
*"The twelve-factor app is completely self-contained"*
The idea is that the application interfaces to the world using a simple URL.

## 8. Concurrency
### Scale out via the process model
When an application is running lots of little processes are handling specific needs, like processing web-requests, api calls, e-mail handling, background jobs, etc.  

keeping all those processes working independently, and running them as separate processes, the application will scale better.

## 9. Disposability
### Maximize robustness with fast startup and graceful shutdown
*"The twelve-factor app's processes are disposable, meaning they can be started or stopped a moment's notice"*
A slim and fast startup and shutdown, makes resources available fast.  
Further, the application should be robust, in a way that if crashes, it should always be able to start back cleanly.

## 10. Dev/prod parity
### Keep development, staging, and production as similar as possible
*"The twelve-factor app is designed for continuous deployment by keeping the gap between development and production small."*  

*"The twelve-factor developer resists the urge to use different backing services between development and production"*

Well, you should keep the different environments of your application as close as possible to production, that means, using the same OS, same DB, same caching, load balance, etc. It is quite easier to troubleshoot it, errors are easier to replicate...

## 11. Logs
### Treat logs as event streams
*"A twelve-factor app never concerns itself with routing or storage of its output stream."*
The application should not have its own logging system, or manage logfiles, but send logging messages directly to STDOUT.

## 12. Admin processes
### Run admin/management tasks as one-off processes
Developers will need from time to time to do administration or maintenance tasks in the production environment.
These tasks should be run in an identical environment as the production, in the same release as the production release, using the same configuration. These tasks should not be done directly, but t through an script.  
For example, if it is needed to do a change in the database, it should not be done by executing sql command directly in the db, but by using a script that was previously executed in a clone environment.
