


S.O.L.I.D stands for:

When expanded the acronyms might seem complicated, but they are pretty simple to grasp.

S - Single-responsiblity principle
O - Open-closed principle
L - Liskov substitution principle
I - Interface segregation principle
D - Dependency Inversion Principle


SOLID help us write code that is:
* Loosely coupled
* High cohesive
* Easily composable
* Context independent
* Reusable
* Easily testable
* Easy to maintain and extend


# Single-responsibility Principle
S.R.P for short - this principle states that:
A class should serve a single purpose
A class should have one and only one reason to change, meaning that a class should have only one job.

# Open-closed Principle
Objects or entities should be open for extension, but closed for modification.
This simply means that a class should be easily extendable without modifying the class itself.
## Actived using:
* inheritance
* composition

## code smells
* snake of if-else cases
* long switch cases

## How to implement
* Replace branching with delegation
* Inject behaviour
  * extract method
  * extract class
* wrap behavior with abstraction

# Liskov substitution principle
Subtypes must substitutable for their base types.

*Let q(x) be a property provable about objects of x of type T. Then q(y) should be provable for objects y of type S where S is a subtype of T.*

All this is stating is that every subclass/derived class should be substitutable for their base/parent class.

If a piece of client code works for a type then it must work  for all derived/variant types
A new subtype should not screw up the client code.

## Rules
* Implement inheritance based on behaviour
* Do not violate behaviour of the parent class
* Obey the pre and post conditions rules

# Interface segregation principle
Many clients specific interfaces (modules) are better than one general purpose interface(module).  
A client should never be forced to implement an interface that it doesn't use or clients shouldn't be forced to depend on methods they do not use.

# Dependency Inversion principle

The last, but definitely not the least states that:

Entities must depend on abstractions not on concretions. It states that the high level module must not depend on the low level module, but they should depend on abstractions.




https://robsoncastilho.com.br/2013/05/01/principios-solid-principio-da-inversao-de-dependencia-dip/
