---
layout: post
title:  "Using an Ipad to develop"
date:   2017-09-15 19:45:31 -0300
categories: [article]
tags: [ruby, ipad]
author: Marcelo Foss
---
I own Ipads sice they were launched in 2010. I still own the first one, then I purchased the first mini, and now I have a Ipad Air 2. The device is portable, is thin, the battery lasts for a long time.

I use it to read (I almost abolished printed books since them), for note taking, to surf the web. I never saw it as an possible replacement for a laptop, but due to the portability and the battery duration, I saw that I could extend its usage, and make an alternative for the laptop, and the most dfficult part would be to make it a development device.

However, you can combine an iPad with a VPS (Virtual Private Server) to have access to the best of both worlds. In essence, a VPS is a remote computer where you have full access to an Linux system. You can install all the web development tools you normally use on your laptop or desktop. Then you use your iPad to SSH into your VPS, giving you full access to your remote system through the terminal.
Think about what this means — an iPad can never be a fully fledged laptop replacement, but with a VPS it doesn’t have to be! Let the iPad be the iPad, and your VPS will be the remote computer that handles everything else. Services like DigitalOcean and Linode offer a VPS for $5/month, so it’s very affordable to get started!
This isn’t a unique idea — some people have been using this setup for years, and there are several good write-ups about it. This post will cover the tools and tips that I have found useful for my specific workflow.

For the past year or so, I’ve been very inspired by Federico Viticci’s posts about iPad automation and more specifically, life on iPad. They’re great, and I’d urge you to read some of them. I always told myself to use my iPad more often, but I never did. I found the screen a tad to small to do actual work on and the apps weren’t quite there yet.

But then iOS 8, iOS 9 and the iPad Pro came along, so I bought a 128GB, cellular iPad Pro with an Apple Pencil and Smart Keyboard. I also had a friend look after my MacBook for a minimum of a month. A few weeks later, here I am, living life with an iPad Pro as my main computer. It’s awesome, mainly because I managed to develop new workflows that let me do my work in a quick and efficient way. I’ve linked apps together, added custom scripts and downloaded others. What helped me through all of this were the really good Macstories posts and workflow examples. I’ll try to describe how I work below.

##The tools
An iPad (I use a 12.9" iPad Pro)
A compatible keyboard (I use the iPad Pro Smart Keyboard)
A Virtual Private Server (I use DigitalOcean’s $5/month plan)
An iOS terminal app (I use Blink)
An iOS text editor (I don’t use one, I use Vim instead)

##Development

For development, I mainly use Coda. With Coda I can access the servers on which my projects are hosted and do work on them. It’s amazing that everything, from the Mac version, is available in this version as well. You can FTP files to your server, you can edit files live on the server and you can create complete new sites. The best part is that it integrates Panic Sync and thus syncs all of your server settings across various Coda installs.

Furthermore, I use View Source to look at source code, Transmit to transmit large files to my servers and Prompt to do some server maintenance by running some commands on them.

For the last few days, though, I’ve been beta testing an upcoming app that has quickly found it’s way into my workflows and has become essential for me. The app is called Web Tools and it can be described as Inspector on iOS. You can look up source code, css styles and test your website’s responsiveness. Also, in a future release Web Tools will get a console for javascript debugging.

##Writing

Recently this post got me thinking about creating a proper workflow to post to send markdown posts to WordPress. As it turned out, I only needed to copy the workflows described in this post. This is a much better workflow than the native WordPress app or publishing a post through the webapp. You can do this with 1Writer and Workflow.

https://sjrd.co/2015/12/07/life-on-ipad-pro/

https://medium.com/@jozefvaclavik/week-of-a-web-developer-on-an-ipad-83fae5238091

https://medium.com/@peterxjang/web-development-on-an-ipad-69f253bc9c38

https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/06/setup-a-ubuntu-vps-for-hosting-ruby-on-rails-applications-2/
